---
layout: post
title: A seasonal ARIMA model to predict avergage monthly temperatures in Victoria, BC
---

## Introduction
Air temperature is an environmental measure that has been widely studied because it reflects the balance of ecosystems. Therefore, air temperature is deemed a prominent indicator of climate change. Many studies suggest that global temperatures are changing but the scale and impact of this change is different depending on the location of interest [Kennedy, 2020]. This study aims to examine the average monthly air temperatures in the city of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada using time series analysis to model the temperature change in the last two decades and make future predictions.

### The Data
The data used in this study are retrieved from the National Centers for Environment Information through their Climate Data Online Search [NOAA, 2021]. The data set accompanies this report and contains the average monthly air temperatures recorded at the University of Victoria station from December 1992 to February 2021, presented under the variable named `TAVG`. There are three missing temperatures for October 2003, January 2020, and February 2020. For this reason, we use values from the Esquimalt Harbour station in Victoria for October 2013 and the James Bay station in Victoria for January and February 2020. Esquimalt station's data is also provided by NOAA and James Bay station's data is from the Government of Canada's Historical Climate data portal [Government of Canada, 2021]. We assume that the temperature readings at these two stations for the months aforementioned would be approximately the same as those at the University of Victoria station, if had been available.

The average monthly temperature is computed by adding the unrounded monthly maximum and minimum temperatures and dividing by 2. In the dataset, `TAVG` is missing if more than 5 days within the month are missing or flagged or if more than 3 consecutive values within the month are missing or flagged.

## Data Transformation
Figure 1 presents a graph of the data, which shows that the average monthly temperatures fluctuate depending on the time of year.
```r
library(astsa)
# create time series, graph it
vicTemp <- ts(vicTemp$TAVG, start=c(1992,12), end=c(2021,2), frequency = 12) 
plot.ts(vicTemp, ylab = 'Celcius', main = 'Figure 1. Average monthly air temperatures in Victoria') # Fig1
```
To make the series stationary, we apply the first difference and the first seasonal difference. Figure 2 displays the transformed series as a result.
```r
# transform the series (take the first difference and first seasonal difference)
tsplot(diff(diff(vicTemp),12), main = "Figure 2. Transformed series", 
       ylab = "Celcius")  # Fig2
abline(h=0, col=2)
```

## Fitted Model
Figure 3 presents the ACF and PACF plots of the transformed series, showing that the ACF cuts off after lag 1 at seasonal lags (Q=1) and the PACF tails off at seasonal lags (P=0).
```r
acf2(diff(diff(vicTemp),12), 100, main = "Figure 3. ACF and PACF of transformed series") # Fig3
```

We identify d = 1, P = 0, D = 1, Q = 1, s = 12 from the transformation, ACF, and PACF plots. However, it is not clear what p and q are so we try many values for them in the fitted models and examine the residual analysis, which results in the final model (with p=q=1): \\[ ARIMA(1, 1, 1)\times(0,1,1)_{12} \\]

The residuals plots for this model are presented in Figure 4. The residuals are normally distributed and uncorrelated. There are a few outliers. The coefficient estimates are within the unit circle and significant (p-values $\approx$ 0), indicating the model is causal/do not depend on the future, and can be used for forecasting. 
```r
# p = 1, d = 1, q = 1, P = 0,  D = 1, Q = 1, s = 12
sarima(vicTemp, 1,1,1, 0,1,1, 12) # Fig4
```
Figure 4. Residuals plots

## Predictions
The forecasts and prediction intervals for the next 10 observations (March 2021 to December 2021) are displayed in Figure 5. The predicted average monthly temperatures and their 95\% confidence intervals are summarized in Table 1.
```r
fore <- sarima.for(vicTemp,10, 1,1,1, 0,1,1, 12) #Fig5 & Table1
title(main="Figure 5. Predictions from March 2021 to December 2021", 
      ylab="                            (Celcius)")
```

```r
library(kableExtra)
months <- c('03/2021', '04/2021', '05/2021', '06/2021', '07/2021', '08/2021', '09/2021', '10/2021', '11/2021', '12/2021')
d <- data.frame("Months" = months, "Predictions" = fore$pred, "Lower Bound" = fore$pred - 1.96*fore$se, "Upper Bound" = fore$pred - 1.96*fore$se)
d %>%
  kbl() %>%
  kable_material(c("striped", "hover")) %>%
  footnote(general_title = "", general = "Table 1. Predicted average temperatures for the next 10 monhts.") #Table1
```

## Conclusion
This study was able to apply a seasonal ARIMA model, a reliable and appropriate method to the specific case of modeling the monthly temperature changes in Victoria. The recorded average temperature of March 2021 is 6.2 degree Celcius [Government of Canada, 2021], which is close to 6.9 and within the (4.9, 9.0) confidence interval as predicted by our model. This reflects the credibility of the model.

It is important to note the incompleteness of the original University of Victoria data. We recognize that backfilling using data from other sources (Esquimalt Harbour and James Bay stations) may interfere with data accuracy and consistency, in that temperature readings from different stations, while in the same city, are not necessarily be the same.

Overall, the data shows that average temperatures in the same month over the years are fairly stable, which is a good sign. Similar studies would help monitor temperature changes to ensure appropriate and timely responses are taken.

## References
Government of Canada (2021). Historical Data [Data set]. [https://climate.weather.gc.ca/historical_data/search_historic_data_e.html](https://climate.weather.gc.ca/historical_data/search_historic_data_e.html)

Kennedy, C. (2020, October 29). Does "global warming" mean it's warming everywhere? Retrieved April 10, 2021, from [https://www.climate.gov/news-features/climate-qa/does-global-warming-mean-it%E2%80%99s-warming-everywhere](https://www.climate.gov/news-features/climate-qa/does-global-warming-mean-it%E2%80%99s-warming-everywhere)

NOAA (2021). Global Summary of the Month Station Details [Data set]. [https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/datasets/GSOM/stations/GHCND:CA001018598/detail](https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/datasets/GSOM/stations/GHCND:CA001018598/detail)

